= DeltaForce

DeltaForce allows you to use some Postgres 8.4+ window functions in named scopes on your ActiveRecord models.

It is very much still a work in progress; please contribute if possible and let me know what I can do better!

== Installing

<b>DeltaForce only works with Rails 2.3</b>. I will be adding Rails 3 compatibility shortly.

In your Gemfile:

  gem "delta_force"

== Example

Consider the following schema and model:

  create_table "foos", :force => true do |t|
    t.integer  "bar_id"
    t.float    "x"
    t.float    "y"
    t.float    "z"
    t.date     "period"
  end

  class Foo < ActiveRecord::Base
    tracks_changes_over_time do |changes|
      changes.values :x, :y, :z, :over => :period, :by => :bar_id
    end
  end


You can now get the opening and closing values by bar_id as follows:
  Foo.changes_in_x_and_y_and_z_by_bar_id_over_period

If the following Foo objects exist:

  #<Foo id: 1, bar_id: 1, x: 1.0, y: 10.0, z: 100.0, period: "2011-03-11">
  #<Foo id: 2, bar_id: 1, x: 2.0, y: 20.0, z: 200.0, period: "2011-03-10">
  #<Foo id: 3, bar_id: 1, x: 3.0, y: 30.0, z: 300.0, period: "2011-03-09">
  #<Foo id: 4, bar_id: 2, x: 4.0, y: 40.0, z: 400.0, period: "2011-03-08">
  #<Foo id: 5, bar_id: 2, x: 5.0, y: 50.0, z: 500.0, period: "2011-03-07">
  #<Foo id: 6, bar_id: 2, x: 6.0, y: 60.0, z: 600.0, period: "2011-03-06">
  #<Foo id: 7, bar_id: 2, x: 7.0, y: 70.0, z: 700.0, period: "2011-03-05">

You can retrieve a set of modified Foo objects that have opening and closing values, partitioned by bar_id, for x, y, and z as follows:

  Foo.changes_in_x_and_y_and_z_by_bar_id_over_period
  => [#<Foo bar_id: 1>, #<Foo bar_id: 2>]

  Foo.changes_in_x_and_y_and_z_by_bar_id_over_period.first.opening_x
   => "3"

  Foo.changes_in_x_and_y_and_z_by_bar_id_over_period.first.closing_x
   => "1"

  Foo.changes_in_x_and_y_and_z_by_bar_id_over_period.first.closing_y
   => "10"

  Foo.changes_in_x_and_y_and_z_by_bar_id_over_period.first.opening_y
   => "30"

  Foo.changes_in_x_and_y_and_z_by_bar_id_over_period.first.opening_period
   => "2011-03-09"

  Foo.changes_in_x_and_y_and_z_by_bar_id_over_period.first.closing_period
   => "2011-03-11"

Note that opening_* and closing_* values are not currently typecast.  I'd like to support that in the future.

== Under the hood

DeltaForce uses {Postgres 8.4+ window functions}[http://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/tutorial-window.html] to partition data by an arbitrary key.

This has been tested against Postgres 8.4 and should also work with Postgres 9.  Oracle provides the same set of functions, but I have not been able to test it against an Oracle instance yet.

== Copyright

Copyright (c) 2011 {Joe Lind}[http://github.com/joelind]. See LICENSE for details.
